---
layout: default
title: v13_103
---
# 16S rDNA V1-3 Amplicon Sequencing
Version 1.03 - [download as pdf](link)

## Introduction
This protocol describes how to make amplicon sequencing libraries of the variable region 1 to 3 (V1-3) of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. The library preparation is PCR based and relies on PCR primes targeting conserved sequence regions between the variable regions in the bacterial 16S rRNA genes. This means that the approach might not target bacteria which contain mismatches in the primer binding regions, especially towards the 3' end of the primer match.

The sequenced part of the V1-3 region starts at E. coli position 28 and ends at E. coli position 517 and is total of 489 bp. However, the actual length depends on the target species and might vary up to +/- 75 bp. The amplicon DNA molecule includes the primer sequences and the Illumina sequencing adaptors and is a total of 615 bp in E. coli and likewise smaller/larger in other species.

The protocol assumes the use of 2x300 bp Illumina MiSeq reads to sequence the full V1-3 region. See the protocol to set up the MiSeq for 2x300 bp [here](miseq_103.html). Note that 2x300 bp is not currently supported by Illumina.

## Materials
### Instruments
{% highlight text %}
- Nanodrop1000 (Thermo Scientific)
- Electrophoresis setup
- Qubit® 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen)
- Infinite® M1000 PRO plate reader (Tecan)
- Thermocycler
- Magnetic Stand-96 (Invitrogen)
- Tapestation2200 (Agilent)
 {% endhighlight %}

### Reagents
{% highlight text %}
- DNAse free tips (10uL, 300uL and 1000 uL)
- DNAse free tubes (1.5 mL)
- 96-well PCR plates (VWR 82006-664)
- PCR strip caps
- OptiPlate-96 Black (Perkin Elmer)
- DNA H2O
- Seakem Agarose
- Gelred
- 1kb Generuler
- TAE-buffer
- Qubit - dsDNA BR assay kit (Invitrogen)
- QUANT-iT  DNA Assay High Sensitivity kit (Invitrogen)
- Platinum® Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity kit (Invitrogen)
- dNTP mix
- Barcoded V1-3 adaptor mixes (50 combinations)
- Agencourt AMPure XP (Beckman Coulter)
- EtOH, 99%
- D1K Screentape (Agilent)
{% endhighlight %}

## Method  

### Planning
Barcode names and sequences are available here: [EB standard 16S Amplicon Primer Sequences v1.0](link).

### Input sample material
DNA samples must be extracted using the exact same procedure if they are to be compared. Preferably perform DNA extraction of biological triplicates and amplicon analysis of on each replicate independently.

[Activated Sludge standard DNA extraction](link)

### Sample DNA QC and dilution

#### 1. Quality and Concentration Check 
* Nanodrop DNA measurement. Use guidelines provided by the vendor (save values for concentration, A260/280, A260/230 and UV-vis absorbance curve. 
* Quality check: A260/280 should be 1.8 to 2.0. A260/230 2.0 to 2.2. Also compare the UV-vis absorbance curve to that of pure DNA. 
* Note: DNA extracted with ‘FastDNA spin kit for soil’ is known to contain contamination producing a peak around 230 nm. The contaminant does not effect this protocol but may result in overestimation of the DNA concentration. 

#### 2. Preliminary dilution 
* Based on the Nanodrop concentrations measurements dilute all samples to 20 ng/ul in a volume of at least 15 ul in a 96-well plate using DNA H2O.

#### 3. Run gel electrophoresis
* Prepare a 1% agarose gel and run a total of 20-50 ng sample DNA for approximately 45 min at 120V together with 1kb ladder. 
* Capture gel image on gel-doc, save and analyze. The majority of DNA should be in the range 3-10 kb or above. If it is below it might affect the analysis.

#### 4. Measure DNA concentration of diluted samples using either Qubit (low throughput) or TECAN (high throughput)
* Qubit - dsDNA BR assay kit: Follow standard protocol. Measure in duplicate. Load at least 2 ul sample to avoid pipetting variance. Re-measure samples where the duplicate values are very different.
* TECAN - QUANT-iT DNA Assay High Sensitivity kit: Follow standard protocol. Measure samples and standards in duplicate. Load at least 2 ul sample to avoid pipetting variance. Re-measure samples where the duplicate values are very different.

#### 5. Based on Quant-iT/Qubit measurements dilute the samples to 5 ng/ul with DNA H2O

### Library PCR

#### Notes
* Use a multipipette!
* Library PCR reaction is run in duplicate for each sample. 
* Remember negative control (DNA H2O) and positive control (sample run before). 

#### 1. Prepare master mix:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Stock Reagents</th>
<th>Final conc.</th>
<th>1 reaction (ul)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>DNA H20</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>15.65</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>x10 buffer Platinum® High Fidelity</td>
<td>x1</td>
<td>2.50</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>dNTP (5 mM)</td>
<td>400 µM</td>
<td>2.00</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>MgSO4 (50mM)</td>
<td>1.5 mM</td>
<td>0.75</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Platinum® Taq DNA Polymerase High Fidelity (0.5 U/µl)</td>
<td>2mU</td>
<td>0.10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Total volume</td>
<td>-</td>
<td>21.00</td>
</tr>
</table> 

NB: When handling many samples prepare for `n(samples) x2 + 5`, so the multipipette can be used.

#### 2. Transfer 21 ul of mastermix to the wells of a 96-well PCR plate.
 
#### 3.	Add 2 ul of assigned barcoded V1-3 adaptor mix (5uM) to each well. Final conc. is 400 nM.
 
#### 4.	Add 2 ul of template (ca. 10 ng total DNA)

#### 5.	Run PCR program "16S AMP PCR V13 30C"

<table>
<tr>
<th>Temperature</th>
<th>Time</th>
<th>Cycles</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>95 C</td>
<td>2 min</td>
<th>1</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>---------- 30 ----------</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>95 C</td>
<td>20 sec</td>
<th>|</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>56 C</td>
<td>30 sec</td>
<th>|</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>72 C</td>
<td>60 sec</td>
<th>|</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<th></th>
<th></th>
<th>------------------------</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>72 C</td>
<td>5 min</td>
<th>1</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4 C</td>
<td>Forever</td>
</tr>
</table> 

#### 6. Pool the duplicates.


### Library Cleanup
NB: Use multipipette

#### 1. Gently shake Agencourt AMPure XP Bottle to resuspend beads, remove required amount and adjust to room temperature.

#### 2. Add 90 ul of bead solution to 50 ul of sample, mix with pipette (10 times up and down) and transfer to VWR half-skirted 96-well PCR plate (VWR 82006-664). The aforementioned plates were found to be the best suited.

#### 3. Incubate for 5 minutes at room temperature.

#### 4. Place tubes in magnetic rack for 2-4 minutes - until the liquid is cleared.

#### 5. Remove and discard the liquid.

#### 6. Remove the 96-well PCR plate, attach ‘elevation plates’ and replace the 96-well plate on the magnetic stand.

#### 7. Wash bead-pellets twice with 200 ul 70% EtOH. The EtOH solution should be made fresh every time or product might be lost.

#### 8. Ensure no excess liquid is left after the washes. If there is, remove it with a pipette.

#### 9. Dry for approximately 10 min to evaporate the EtOH. Longer dry times will dry out the pellet and make it difficult to resuspend, resulting in product loss.

#### 10. Remove the 96-well plate from magnetic rack. Add 33 ul of DNA H2O water to each well and mix with pipette (>10x) to resuspend beads.

#### 11. Place the 96-well plate back on the magnetic rack and wait until the liquid clears.

#### 12. Transfer 30 ul of the liquid to a new 96 well plate for storage

### Library QC

#### 1. Tapestation (randomly sample 14 of the prepared samples)
* D1K Screentape: Follow standard protocol. No replicate. Remember negative control (DNA H2O).
* The amplicon should have an average size around 615 bp. There should be no product below 300 bp.

#### 2. Qubit/TECAN
* Qubit - dsDNA BR assay kit: Follow standard protocol. Measure in duplicate. Load at least 2 ul sample to avoid pipetting variance. Re-measure samples where the duplicate values are very different.
* TECAN - QUANT-iT  DNA Assay High Sensitivity kit: Follow standard protocol. Measure samples and standards in duplicate. Load at least 2 ul sample to avoid pipetting variance. Re-measure samples where the duplicate values are very different.

### Literature
* Caporaso, J. G., Lauber, C. L., Walters, W. A., Berg-Lyons, D., Lozupone, C. A., Turnbaugh, P. J., et. al., (2011). Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth of millions of sequences per sample. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 Suppl , 4516–22. doi:10.1073/pnas.1000080107
* Caporaso, J. G., Lauber, C. L., Walters, W. a, Berg-Lyons, D., Huntley, J., Fierer, N., et. al., (2012). Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. The ISME journal, 6(8), 1621–4. doi:10.1038/ismej.2012.8
* HMP Consortium - 16S 454 Sequencing Protocol,  Version 4.2.2, Effective Date: October	27, 2010. Authors: Jumpstart Consortium	Human	Microbiome Project Data Generation Working Group

### Revision History

#### V1.00 2013-2-14
* Protocol was created on the basis of numerous journals.

#### V1.01 2013-4-2
* Elaborated on the planning step.
* Elaborated on DNA input requirements.
* Gel check of DNA quality: Corrected Agarose concentration from 1.0% to 0.5%.
* Gel check of DNA quality: Changed the target DNA molecular size to 3-10 kb. This is the range we see when using our standard DNA extraction protocol (4x40s at 6 m/s bead beating with the FastSPIN DNA kit for soil).
* Measure DNA Concentration of Diluted samples: Changed replicates from triplicates to duplicates. Our experience have shown that there are little variance on the DNA concentrations measurements performed with primarily the TECAN but also to some degree the Quibit. Furthermore we believe that an exact DNA concentrations is not critical at this point. If it’s off less than 30% it should be okay, but strictly this has not been proven. By reducing from triplicates to duplicates we use less reagents and save time.
* Mastermix: Corrected dNTP stock concentration and final concentration.
* Added 96-well plate ref. number.

#### V1.02 2013-5-12
* Added prerequisites for using the protocol
* Added an introduction to the protocol, which elaborates a bit on the target region of the 16S.

#### V1.03 2013-8-18
* Cleaned up sample submission description.
* Added list of materials.



